 Git and  GitHub are  the development  platforms which  help  developers  to  host  and  review  code,  manage projects,  and  build  software  alongside  millions  of  other developers. Git is the open source distributed version control system  that facilitates  GitHub activities on  your laptop  or desktop. Git, GitHub, and GitHub Pages are all very closely related. Git is the workflow to get things done and GitHub and GitHub Pages are places to store the work done. Projects that use Git are stored publicly in GitHub and GitHub Pages, so in a very generalized way, Git is what you do locally on your own computer and GitHub is the place where all this gets stored publicly on a server. This article explains basics of Git and  Github along  with installation  guide and  some basic commands. Key words: Git, GitHub, GitHub Pages, Distributed version control system I. INTRODUCTION As with  many great things in  life, Git began  with a bit  of creative destruction and fiery controversy. The Linux kernel is an open source software project of fairly large scope. For most of the lifetime of the Linux kernel maintenance (1991–2002), changes to the software were passed around as patches and archived files. In 2002, the Linux kernel project began using a proprietary DVCS called BitKeeper. In  2005, the  relationship between  the community that developed the Linux kernel and the commercial company that developed BitKeeper broke down, and the tool’s free-of-charge  status  was  revoked.  This  prompted  the  Linux development community (and in particular Linus Torvalds, the creator of Linux) to develop their own tool based on some of the lessons they learned while using BitKeeper. Some of the goals of the new system were as follows:  Speed   Simple design  Strong support for non-linear development (thousands of parallel branches)  Fully distributed   Able  to  handle  large  projects  like  the  Linux  kernel efficiently (speed and data size). [1]  So, Linus Torvalds designed and developed Git for Linux  kernel  development  in  2005.  Git  is  free  software distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  GNU  General  Public License  version  2.The  following  section  explain  some background  about  version  control  system  followed  by introduction to git and its installation for windows O.S. Version control is a system that records changes to a file or set of files over time so that you can recall specific versions  later.[1]  The  functions  of  a  Version  Control System(VCS) :   Allows developers to work simultaneously.   Does not allow overwriting each other’s changes. 
 Maintains a history of every version.   Following are the types of VCS:   Centralized version control system (CVCS).  Distributed/Decentralized  version  control  system (DVCS). Git  is  a  Distributed  version  control  system  that tracks  changes  to  files  in a  project  over  time.  Following section explains Git basics, its installation on windows O.S. and Some basic commands like init, clone, add, commit, diff, and log. II. BASICS OF GIT AND GITHUB Git is a fast, scalable distributed version control system that tracks changes  to computer  files and  coordinates work on those files  among multiple  people. It  is primarily  used for software development, but  it can  be used to keep  track of changes in  any files.  Git Repository maintains information about the changes made in a file, who made the changes, at what time changes were made, notes and comments about the changes  made.  It typically  records what  the changes  were (what was  added? what was  removed from the  file?), who made the changes, notes and comments about the changes by the changer, and at what time the changes were made. Git is for people who  want to maintain multiple versions of their files in an efficient manner and travel back in time to visit different versions without juggling numerous files along with their confusing names stored at different locations. [2] GitHub is a web hosting service for the source code of  software  and  web  development  projects  (or  other  text based projects) that use Git. In many cases, most of the code is  publicly  available,  enabling  developers  to  easily investigate, collaborate, download, use, improve, and remix that code. The container for the code of a specific project is called a repository. [2] A. The Three States of Git: Git  has  three  main  states  that  your  files  can  reside  in: committed, modified, and staged. Committed means that the data is safely stored in your local database. Modified means that you have changed the file but have not committed it to your  database yet.  Staged means  that  you have  marked  a modified  file  in  its  current  version  to  go  into  your  next commit snapshot. This  leads us  to the  three main sections  of a  Git project:  the  Git  directory,  the  working  directory,  and  the staging area. 
A Beginner’s Guide to Git and GitHub  (IJSRD/Vol. 5/Issue 03/2017/358)   All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 1404  Fig. 1: Working Directory, Staging area and Git Directory The Git directory is where Git stores the metadata and  object  database  for  your  project.  This  is  the  most important part of Git, and it is what is copied when you clone a repository from another computer. The working tree is a single checkout of one version of the project. These files are pulled out of the compressed database in the Git directory and placed on disk for you to use or modify. The staging area is a file, generally contained in your Git directory that stores information about what will go into your next commit. It’s sometimes referred to as the “index”, but it’s also common to refer to it as the staging area. The basic Git workflow goes something like this:  Modify files in working tree.  Stage the files, adding snapshots of them to staging area.  Do a  commit, which  takes the files as  they are  in the staging area and stores that snapshot permanently to Git directory. If a particular version of a file is in the Git directory, it’s considered  committed.  If it  has  been  modified and  was added to the staging area, it is staged. And if it was changed since  it  was  checked  out  but  has  not  been  staged,  it  is modified.
